Title: Learn by Surprise, Commit by Proof

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.01951v1

Published Time: Fri, 03 Apr 2026 01:00:59 GMT

Number of Pages: 24

Markdown Content:
# Learn by Surprise, Commit by Proof 

## Kang-Sin Choi 

Ewha Womans University 

## kangsin@ewha.ac.kr 

Abstract 

We propose LSCP , a self-gated post-training framework for autonomous knowledge acquisi-tion: learning only what a model does not already know, verified against what it does know, at a strength proportional to conviction, with no external oracle. When a passage produces anomalously high per-token loss, LSCP flags it, generates a Q&A chain that forces the model to articulate its own knowledge and identify gaps, then adjusts AdamW’s β2 proportionally to conviction depth k (the number of self-verification steps the passage survives) via β2 = 0 .999 · rk.The entire learning intensity is governed by a single parameter r. Beyond new knowledge, this process sharpens weakly encoded existing knowledge, which is a primary source of hallu-cination. The framework is self-extinguishing: as the model learns, per-token loss on learned passages decreases toward the surprisal threshold and the system progressively converges to standard AdamW. This models biological memory consolidation: temporary information in the context window is selectively consolidated into parametric weights, the model’s long-term memory. Experiments on the reference model (Qwen3-14B) and across six models (8B–32B, four families) show that standard fine-tuning produces rote memorization (perturbation gap (the ratio of paraphrase to original perplexity) of 11 .6 ± 0.2× baseline) while all LSCP conditions learn semantically (2 .7–3 .0×). The r = 1 .0 condition (identical optimizer, nearly identical data, only Q&A format differs) confirms that the training data format, not β2 gating, is the primary mechanism preventing memorization; gating instead protects neighboring knowledge from contamination by corrupt content (93 ± 7% accuracy on adjacent questions at r = 0 .98 vs. 90% baseline). 

1. Surprise 2. Self-verification 3. Consolidation 

Passage-level surprisal Si

Flag if Si > μ + λσ 

From context window Generate QA pairs Conviction depth k

Consistency check + annotate Update weights θ

β2 = 0 .999 · r k

Long-term memory Flags unfamiliar content; either novel or corrupt Self-extinguishing: converges to standard AdamW Memory consolidation: context → parametric weights 

Figure 1: LSCP pipeline overview. Stage 1 detects surprising passages via passage-level surprisal. Stage 2 generates Q&A pairs, checks consistency against existing knowledge, grades each passage by conviction depth k, and annotates epistemic boundaries. Stage 3 adjusts AdamW’s β2 proportionally to k, selectively opening the Variance Lock for verified content. 1

> arXiv:2604.01951v1 [cs.LG] 2 Apr 2026

# 1 Introduction 

Can language models study by themselves? Modern large language models are trained to predict the next token in a sequence, an objective that, when applied to trillions of tokens, yields models with remarkable breadth of factual knowledge and reasoning ability. Yet once deployed, these models cannot learn from what they read. New information enters the context window and is discarded when the context ends. The model does not study; it merely consults a temporary buffer. Existing approaches avoid rather than solve this problem. Fine-tuning forces weight updates indiscriminately, causing catastrophic forgetting [1]: the model learns new content but overwrites old knowledge. Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) [2] avoids weight updates entirely, placing retrieved information in the context window, a short-term memory solution that never consolidates into long-term storage, with well-documented failure modes: context pollution [3], lost-in-the-middle degradation [4] and inability to form cross-document inferences. Knowledge editing techniques modify individual facts but do not scale. Continual learning methods address forgetting but require external supervision. None of these approaches consults the model’s own knowledge state to decide what should and should not be learned. The core difficulty is that novelty is indistinguishable from noise. Why not simply amplify the learning signal for surprising content? Because high loss does not distinguish genuine novelty from noise. A groundbreaking scientific discovery and a plausible fabrication produce equally high per-token surprisal. Any mechanism that opens the optimizer to high-loss content without verification would corrupt the model’s weights. Moreover, for the knowledge that matters most (cutting-edge discoveries, recent experimental results, findings not yet in any knowledge base), no external verification exists. Other models do not know it either; retrieval has nothing to retrieve; verifiable rewards cannot be computed for claims whose truth is not yet established. The only available reference is the model’s own existing knowledge: “does this new claim contradict what I already know?” This is not a limitation but a necessary design point. It is also exactly how humans evaluate cutting-edge knowledge: when peer review is unavailable, a scientist judges a new finding by its consistency with established principles. Imperfect, but the only option when external oracles do not exist. There is a structural irony: the more a model has learned, the harder it becomes to learn anything new. AdamW [5] maintains a second-moment estimate vt (controlled by β2 ≈ 0.999) that divides each gradient by the square root of its own historical variance. After trillions of training tokens, vt

is large and stable. When a novel passage produces a large gradient, vt suppresses the update: the optimizer treats surprise as instability and applies the brakes precisely when the signal is strongest. We call this the Variance Lock . One might lower β2 to open it, but doing so indiscriminately would amplify noise along with novelty. The key challenge is selective lock release: opening the optimizer only for content that has been verified as consistent with existing knowledge. Human memory solves this problem through a dedicated consolidation mechanism: the amygdala detects cognitively salient events [6], precisely those that are surprising or contradictory to prior beliefs, and gates their transfer from working memory to long-term storage via the hippocampus. We propose LSCP (Learn by Surprise, Commit by Proof), a self-gated post-training framework and computational analogue of this architecture, built on a simple observation: every language model already “notices” surprising content . The per-token loss 

st = − log pθ(xt | x<t ) (1) 2is computed at every forward pass and is identical to the per-token cross-entropy loss used during training. When a passage produces anomalously high mean surprisal, the model is surprised. In cognitive neuroscience, surprise plays an analogous role: predictive coding theories [7, 8] hold that neural systems constantly predict upcoming input, and prediction error triggers both larger learning signals and the marking of new episodic events [9]. In current LLM architectures, this signal is used to compute a gradient and then discarded. LSCP provides the missing response: 

The per-token loss is a free signal: already computed, already informative. It only needs a downstream pipeline to turn surprise into action: self-generated validation and gated weight updates. 

The pipeline has three stages. Stage 1 detects surprise: passages with anomalously high per-token loss are flagged as candidates. Stage 2 verifies: a progressive chain of question-answer pairs tests whether the surprising content is consistent with the model’s existing knowledge, separating novelty from noise. Stage 3 opens the lock: for verified content, AdamW’s β2 is temporarily lowered in proportion to conviction depth, allowing the optimizer to absorb the new information; unverified content receives high β2, keeping the lock closed. The result is selective transfer from context (short-term memory) to weights (long-term memory), gated by the model’s own epistemic state, with no external oracle. Algorithm 1 summarizes the pipeline. 

# 2 Method 

LSCP operates in three stages given a pretrained model Mθ and an incoming document D: (1) surprise: identifying passages the model does not already know, (2) self-verification: progressive Q&A generation and consistency checking and (3) consolidation: gated weight modification. Figure 1 provides an overview. We describe each stage in turn. 

## 2.1 Stage 1: Detect and Ground 

The connection between per-token loss and knowledge is direct: the LAMA probes [10] demonstrated that pretrained models store relational knowledge in their weights, and the feed-forward layers of Transformers can be interpreted as key-value memories [11] where frequently reinforced patterns are stored reliably and rare knowledge weakly or not at all. High surprisal on a passage therefore signals a gap in the model’s parametric knowledge. Let D = ( x1, x 2, . . . , x T ) be a document tokenized into T tokens. Aggregate per-token surprisal st

(defined in Section 1) over a sliding window of w tokens to obtain passage-level surprisal: 

Si = 1

w

> (i+1) w−1

X

> t=iw

st. (2) A passage Pi is flagged as surprising if Si > μ + λσ , where μ and σ are the mean and standard deviation of surprisal computed over a large reference corpus, and λ is a threshold hyperparameter. Passages below this threshold are presumed to be covered adequately by existing weights and are not processed further. At this stage, the flag indicates only that the model’s predictions are poor for this passage; it does not distinguish novel content from corrupt content. For each flagged passage, LSCP records a contextual grounding from signals that are already available from the forward pass: 

Gi =  Pi, S i, d i

, (3) 3where Pi is the passage text, Si is the passage-level mean surprisal retained as an importance weight, and di is the drop ratio , the normalized decrease in surprisal from the first third to the last third of the passage, measuring how much the model adapts to the content within the forward pass itself. Both numeric fields are derived from the single forward pass at zero additional generation cost. When source metadata is available (journal name, author credentials and document type), it is prepended to the passage text during training. This serves two purposes. First, situational context helps the model evaluate information: the same claim carries different weight from a peer-reviewed journal versus an anonymous post, just as a human reader’s judgment depends on where and how information is encountered. In non-linguistic learning, this principle is even more direct: knowing 

where you are and what you are looking at is inseparable from understanding what you perceive. Second, co-learning facts with their provenance provides source attribution as a byproduct: the model can later recall not just what it learned but where it learned it. Two additional signals are available but not included in the formal grounding. Peaks , tokens whose individual surprisal st exceeds a local threshold (e.g., the top decile), pinpoint where in the passage the model’s beliefs are under tension. When processing long documents, peak positions define the source window: the passage segment centered on the highest-surprisal region, trimmed to a manageable length for Stage 2. In our experiments, passages are short enough that the source window covers the full text. Narrative context , surrounding passages, document metadata, source credibility signals, provides situational information for Q&A generation but is not formalized as a grounding field because its availability varies across document types. This mirrors the human cognitive experience of encountering unfamiliar information: the model “notices” a passage because it assigns low probability to it, exactly as a reader pauses at an unexpected claim. Actual conflict analysis, determining why the model’s beliefs are challenged and whether the challenge is valid, is deferred to Stage 2, where it belongs. Critically, the grounding stores a pointer to the content rather than a copy. The storage overhead is thus proportional to the number of novel passages, not to document length. In practice, many documents lack explicit source credibility signals: anonymous posts, scraped web text and OCR output. The grounding remains functional: Si and di are always available from the forward pass, and Stage 2’s verification process provides the definitive filter regardless of metadata quality. 

## 2.2 Stage 2: Verify, Grade and Annotate 

An important clarification before describing the mechanism: Stage 2 does not verify whether a passage is true . It verifies whether a passage is consistent with the model’s existing knowledge . A model with systematically wrong beliefs will validate errors that fit those beliefs. The defense against this is not in Stage 2’s filtering accuracy but in Stage 3’s conviction-proportional learning: passages with shallow verification ( k low) receive weak learning, limiting the damage from any single corrupt passage that slips through. Stage 2’s purpose is not merely to accept or reject a passage. It is to force the model to articulate its own knowledge about the passage’s claims, so that verified Q&A pairs can serve as targeted training data that strengthens specific weak points in the model’s weights. When the model generates a question like “Can protein X actually bind to receptor Y?” and answers “Yes, because X has a binding domain complementary to Y’s active site,” two things happen simultaneously: (1) the consistency check verifies whether this answer is correct, and (2) the Q&A pair 4itself becomes a training item that reinforces the correct association protein X → receptor Y binding in the model’s parameters. If this association was weak or uncertain before (the model “sort of knew” but could not reliably produce the correct answer), training on this pair directly strengthens the relevant weights. The Q&A chain is therefore not just a filter; it is a knowledge elicitation mechanism that produces training data precisely targeted at the model’s own epistemic gaps. Each verified pair represents something the model can confirm but may not have strongly committed to its weights, exactly the kind of knowledge that benefits most from consolidation. A language model’s knowledge is distributed across billions of parameters. Recent work on knowledge localization (knowledge neurons [11], activation probing, causal tracing and sparse autoencoder features) has made progress in reading specific facts directly from weights or hidden states. However, these methods require additional training (a probe classifier, an SAE, or labeled fact triples) specific to each model and domain. Moreover, they operate on atomic, structured facts (“X is the capital of Y”) and cannot answer the compound question Stage 2 needs: “Is this passage’s claim consistent with everything the model knows about this topic?” LSCP’s Q&A chain requires zero additional training: it works on any pretrained model, in any domain, immediately. The text interface is the only probe that uses the model’s full reasoning capacity rather than a narrow linear classifier. 

2.2.1 Generating the Q&A Chain 

For each flagged passage Pi, LSCP uses Mθ itself to generate a sequence of N question-answer pairs in a single inference call: 

Qi = (q1, a 1), (q2, a 2), . . . , (qN , a N ) , (4) where N = ⌈Si · c⌉ scales with the passage’s surprisal ( c is a scaling constant), more surprising content receives more questions. In practice, N is clamped to a safe range ( Nmin to Nmax ) to prevent degenerate chains. Each question is tagged by its epistemic origin , flowing naturally from what the model already knows toward what requires the passage. 

[existing] Questions about established domain knowledge the passage assumes or builds on. These must be answerable without reading Pi, from the model’s existing weights alone. They establish a verified baseline. 

[mechanism] The critical category. Rather than asking whether a claim “fits existing knowledge,” a question that the model answers permissively for anything it has not explicitly seen contradicted, mechanism questions attack the specific causal steps the passage chains together. If the passage claims “A causes B which leads to C which enables D,” the prompt instructs the model to test each link separately: 

• Does A actually cause B? (based on known science, not the passage) 

• Does B lead to C? (or does B actually lead to the opposite of C?) 

• Is D achievable through C? (or are there known physical/biological barriers?) The key instruction is: “The field exists” is not sufficient: the specific mechanism must be plausible. 

This prevents the failure mode observed in early experiments where the model confirmed that “vaccines can have neuroprotective effects” (general truth) without checking whether “the flu vaccine reduces dementia by 20% through anti-inflammatory mechanisms” (specific, implausible claim). A corrupt passage whose individual components are scientifically valid but whose assembled claim is false can only be caught by testing the joints between components. 5[implication] Questions of the form “if the passage’s claims are true, what specific, testable consequences follow? Do those consequences conflict with anything known?” These test internal coherence. Questions whose only possible source is the passage itself (specific measurements, unique named results) are excluded entirely; they cannot be verified. Tags are generated by the model alongside each question. Empirically, single-call generation preserves passage-level context: the model sees the full passage and generates questions sequentially, causing corrupt passages’ internal inconsistencies to surface naturally in the question ordering (Cohen’s 

d = 0 .67 for single-call vs. d = 0 .001 for three-call; see Section 3). 

2.2.2 Consistency Checking 

Each pair ( qi, a i) is validated against the model’s existing knowledge using a unified prompt that adapts its evaluation criterion to the question’s tag: valid( qi, a i) = 1Mθ(qi) is consistent with ai

. (5) For [mechanism] questions, the primary discrimination category, the prompt evaluates rigorously whether the specific causal step is scientifically plausible, whether known physical or biological constraints would prevent it and whether the claimed magnitude or efficiency is realistic. Few-shot examples in the prompt demonstrate the expected level of specificity: a FAIL example shows the model rejecting a protein-mineral interaction claim by citing the lack of epitaxial matching at the atomic level, not by generic appeal to “insufficient evidence.” 

Tag-aware break policy. Failures carry different evidential weight: 

• [existing] FAIL (lenient): The question may be poorly formed or the model may lack niche background. The pipeline records the failure and continues. 

• [mechanism] FAIL (hard break): The primary corruption signal. The passage’s specific causal claim contradicts established science. The chain terminates immediately. 

• [implication] FAIL (hard break): Either the passage’s internal logic is incoherent, or the model cannot yet follow the reasoning because prerequisite knowledge is missing. In both cases, the passage should not be consolidated. The chain terminates. 

2.2.3 From Chain Outcome to β2

The chain produces a single number k: how many questions passed before the chain completed or broke. This k feeds directly into the β2 schedule (Section 2.3), providing a continuous spectrum from no learning ( k = 0) to strong commitment ( k large). The number of questions N itself scales with surprisal Si, so more surprising passages face longer chains. Only Q&A pairs that passed consistency checking are added to the training corpus F, with each pair carrying its conviction depth k (the number of verification steps it survived). Passages where the chain breaks at step j contribute all pairs up to j − 1; passages that complete the full chain contribute all N pairs. Each pair in F represents knowledge the model could verify but had not strongly committed to its weights, precisely the weakly encoded associations that benefit most from reinforcement. The conviction depth k determines the per-item β2 in Stage 3: pairs verified through more steps receive stronger learning. 62.2.4 Strangeness: Learning at Epistemic Boundaries 

When the chain breaks at step j, the reasoning behind the failure is not discarded but transformed into an uncertainty-framed training item : “The passage claims X, but I am uncertain. [reasoning from the failed check]. I cannot confirm or rule this out.” This strangeness record is added to the training corpus with the conviction depth k at the break point, receiving correspondingly weak learning through β2 = 0 .999 · rk. The model does not learn the uncertain claim as fact; it learns that uncertainty exists on this topic , strengthening the association between the topic and epistemic caution. This is a distinctive feature of graduated accept: rather than discarding everything at the break point, the model encodes a calibrated record of its own knowledge boundary. 

## 2.3 Stage 3: Gated Weight Update 

AdamW and the role of β2. AdamW maintains two exponential moving averages for each parameter: a first moment mt (gradient mean) and a second moment vt (gradient variance): 

mt = β1 mt−1 + (1 − β1) gt, (6) 

vt = β2 vt−1 + (1 − β2) g2 

> t

, (7) 

θt+1 = θt − η

 ˆmt

√ˆvt + ϵ + λwd θt



, (8) where ˆmt and ˆvt are bias-corrected estimates, η is the learning rate and λwd is the decoupled weight decay coefficient. The key parameter is β2 (default 0 .999): it controls how much history vt retains. High β2 means vt is dominated by past gradients, so the denominator √ˆvt is large and stable, suppressing any single gradient’s influence. This is the Variance Lock . After trillions of pretraining tokens, vt is saturated with historical variance, and novel content that produces a large gradient gt

is divided away by that history. 

Opening the lock: conviction-proportional β2. Lowering β2 makes vt forget its history faster, allowing new gradients to have proportionally more influence. LSCP lowers β2 in proportion to verification evidence: 

β(k)2 = 0 .999 · r k, (9) where r ∈ (0 , 1) is the decay factor and k is the conviction depth , the number of verification steps the passage has passed. When k = 0 (no conviction), β2 = 0 .999, identical to standard AdamW. As conviction deepens, β2 decreases, progressively opening the Variance Lock. A single parameter 

r governs the schedule: N controls how thoroughly the passage is examined, and k controls how strongly it is learned. With r = 0 .9: k = 3 ⇒ β2 = 0 .728 (cautious opening); k = 7 ⇒ β2 = 0 .478 (moderate); 

k = 13 ⇒ β2 = 0 .254 (strong opening). This is a one-line modification to AdamW’s existing β2 hyperparameter, applied selectively per training item. The adjustment applies to all trainable parameters for the duration of each item’s training step, whether those are full model weights or parameter-efficient adapter weights. AdamW’s decoupled weight decay ( λwd θt term in the update rule) provides long-term regularization without explicit shielding. After each passage, β2 returns to 0.999 (the default), and weight decay continuously shrinks all parameters toward zero. Weakly learned patterns (surface memorization) decay faster; strongly reinforced patterns (genuine understanding) persist. This is the same 7Algorithm 1 LSCP: Detect, Verify, Update 

Require: Pretrained model Mθ, passage corpus {Pi}, decay factor r, QA scaling constant c

Ensure: Updated model weights 

// Stage 1: Detect  

> 1:

Compute passage-level surprisal Si for each Pi 

> 2:

Flag passages with Si > μ + λσ 

// Stage 2: Verify (per flagged passage)  

> 3:

N ← ⌈ Si · c⌉ ▷ More questions for higher surprisal  

> 4:

Generate N Q&A pairs tagged [existing]/[mechanism]/[implication]  

> 5:

k ← 0 

> 6:

for each ( qj , a j ) in chain do  

> 7:

if ConsistencyCheck (qj , a j , M θ) = PASS then  

> 8:

k ← k + 1  

> 9:

else if tag is [existing] then  

> 10:

continue ▷ Lenient: proceed  

> 11:

else  

> 12:

Record strangeness; break ▷ Mechanism or implication FAIL  

> 13:

end if  

> 14:

end for 

// Stage 3: Gated weight update  

> 15:

β(k)2 ← 0.999 · r k ▷ k = 0 ⇒ standard AdamW; k↑ ⇒ lock opens  

> 16:

Train on verified Q&A pairs + source window + strangeness with β2 = β(k)2

mechanism that enables grokking in neural networks [12]: weight decay pushes the model away from memorizing solutions toward simpler, generalizing solutions. A passage that fails the consistency check and has only marginally elevated surprisal ( Si near the threshold μ + λσ ) is discarded immediately. Low surprisal combined with inconsistency is the signature of noise or minor errors, not paradigm-challenging knowledge. Concurrently, the contextual grounding {Gi} is stored in an external key-value store. At inference time, a query can retrieve entries from this store via embedding similarity search, providing situational context for the model’s knowledge. Source attribution is available as a byproduct when metadata was recorded. Algorithm 1 summarizes the full pipeline. Obviously, Stages 1, 2 and 3 must operate on the same model Mθ. Stage 1’s surprisal values reflect 

Mθ’s specific knowledge gaps. Stage 2’s Q&A chain elicits Mθ’s own beliefs to identify knowledge gaps. Stage 3’s weight updates target Mθ’s parameters. If a different model were used for verification than for learning, the Q&A pairs would probe the wrong knowledge state; the questions would target another model’s gaps, not the learner’s. 83 Experimental Results 

All experiments use Qwen3-14B (4-bit quantized) on Apple Silicon hardware (M3 Pro, 36 GB) via the MLX framework. The test corpus consists of 60 passages: 20 known (confirming model beliefs), 20 novel (genuine post-cutoff discoveries), and 20 corrupt (plausible falsehoods with a single factual error). The corpus is deliberately small: LSCP’s target use case is learning from individual documents, not bulk corpus training. 

## 3.1 Stage 1: Detection 

Stage 1 computes per-token surprisal for each passage and flags those exceeding a data-driven threshold ( μ + λσ from known passages). 

Surprisal separation. Known passages produced mean surprisal Si = 1 .25, while novel and corrupt passages produced Si ≈ 2.2, yielding Cohen’s d = 3 .52 (known vs. non-known). The automatic threshold was λ = 2 .48. 

Novel vs. corrupt: indistinguishable. Novel and corrupt passages produced nearly identical surprisal distributions ( d = 0 .12). This confirms the core hypothesis: surprisal alone cannot distinguish genuine novelty from plausible falsehood . Both types are equally unfamiliar to the model. Stage 2 verification is necessary. 

Flagging outcome. Of 60 passages, 39 were flagged (all 20 novel + all 19 testable corrupt). All 20 known passages fell below threshold. One corrupt passage was excluded from analysis due to topic overlap. 

## 3.2 Stage 2: Verification 

Stage 2 generates a mechanism-based Q&A chain for each flagged passage and checks each answer against the model’s existing knowledge. Under graduated accept, all flagged passages produce training items regardless of conviction depth. Passages where the chain breaks at step j contribute their first j − 1 verified pairs with correspondingly lower k, receiving weaker learning in Stage 3. Passages with k = 0 (immediate failure on the first question) still enter training but at β2 = 0 .999, effectively standard AdamW, learning only from the strangeness record. There is no binary accept/reject decision; the single parameter r and the formula β2 = 0 .999 · rk continuously modulate learning strength. 

Conviction depth distribution. Under graduated accept, the binary accept/reject distinction is replaced by a distribution of conviction depths. Of 20 novel passages, all 20 produced k > 0; 14 completed the full chain ( k = N ) and 6 broke partway through, contributing verified pairs up to the break point. Of 19 corrupt passages, all 19 also produced k > 0; 13 completed the full chain (a failure of Stage 2 discrimination) and 6 broke early. Only 1 passage (keratin toothpaste, novel) produced k = 0. The distinction between novel and corrupt is therefore not in whether they are accepted (nearly all are) but in the conviction depth and consequent learning strength. Corrupt passages that break early receive low k, and thus high β2 (weak learning); those that pass the full chain receive the same treatment as novel, a limitation addressed in Discussion. 9Category k > 0 Full chain ( k = N ) Mean k/N 

Novel (20) 20 (100%) 14 (70%) 0.82 Corrupt (19) 19 (100%) 13 (68%) 0.79 Table 1: Stage 2 conviction depth distribution under graduated accept. Nearly all passages produce 

k > 0 and enter training. Discrimination occurs through conviction depth: corrupt passages that fail early receive weak learning ( β2 near 0.999), while those that pass the full chain are indistinguishable from novel, the structural blind spot of single-model verification. 

Strangeness records. 27 of 39 passages produced strangeness records at their chain break points. Each record captures the model’s uncertainty in an explicit, learnable format, contributing to the training corpus with low conviction depth. 

Training corpus composition. Under graduated accept, 39 of 40 flagged passages produce training items ( k > 0). The training corpus contains 185 items: Q&A pairs (mechanism and implication), source windows and strangeness records (uncertainty-framed items from chain break points). Each item carries its conviction depth k, which determines its per-item β2 in Stage 3. 

Stability of the self-verification pipeline. To quantify stochastic variation, we repeated Q&A generation (temp= 0 .7) six times and consistency checking (temp= 0 .1) five times on the identical 60-passage corpus. Q&A generation produced 362 ± 10 pairs per run (coefficient of variation 2.7%), with 8 of 40 passages generating the exact same number of pairs across all runs and a mean per-passage standard deviation of 2.1 pairs. The core tag distribution was stable: mechanism 164 ± 8, existing 83 ± 7, implication 83 ± 7. Consistency checking produced 186 ± 5 training items per run, with conviction depth varying by at most one step for most passages. Individual passages can show larger variation (e.g., LLM chemistry discovery: k = 1 /2 in one run, k = 18 /18 in another), consistent with recent findings on knowledge-probing variability [13]. The r-sweep results in Stage 3 capture this variation: each run uses a fresh consistency-checking output, and results are reported as mean ± std. 

## 3.3 Stage 3: Gated Weight Update 

Qwen3-14B base model, 4-bit quantization with LoRA adapters (rank 8, 8 layers), lr = 10 −5, 3 epochs, single optimizer with per-item β2 switching. Three conditions: Baseline (no training), 

Normal (standard SFT on all 39 flagged passages’ raw text, β2 = 0 .999), and LSCP (Stage 2-selected passages, Q&A-based training with per-item β2 = 0 .999 · rk). We sweep the decay parameter 

r ∈ { 0.9, 0.95 , 0.98 , 1.0} under graduated accept, where r = 1 .0 reduces to standard AdamW and lower r values produce progressively stronger gating. Normal represents indiscriminate fine-tuning: same optimizer, same epochs, no curation. Q&A generation is run once; each r-sweep run repeats consistency checking to capture stochastic variation. Q&A generation stability is verified separately (n = 6; see Section 3, Stability). Results are reported as mean ± standard deviation ( n = 5 per condition; r = 0 .98: n = 6). 

Perturbation gap: memorization versus understanding. We introduce the perturbation gap 

as a direct measure of whether training produces memorization or understanding. For each passage, we compute PPL on the original text and on a semantically equivalent paraphrase (same facts, completely different wording). The ratio gap = PPL paraphrase /PPL original reveals what was learned: 10 if the model memorized token sequences, it predicts the original well but fails on the paraphrase (gap ≫ 1); if it learned semantic associations, both are predicted similarly (gap ≈ baseline). The baseline gap is 2 .2×, not 1 .0×, because paraphrases use different vocabulary and syntax; even without any training, the model assigns different probabilities to different wordings of the same fact. This natural gap is the reference point: memorization is measured as deviation above baseline, not above unity. Condition Perturbation Gap Items Interpretation Baseline 2.20 — Reference (no learning) Normal 11 .6 ± 0.2 39 5.3× baseline: rote memorization LSCP r = 0 .9 3.04 ± 0.08 186 ± 5 Near baseline: semantic learning LSCP r = 0 .95 2.83 ± 0.04 186 ± 5 Near baseline: semantic learning LSCP r = 0 .98 2.69 ± 0.03 186 ± 5 Near baseline: semantic learning LSCP r = 1 .0 2.68 ± 0.03 186 ± 5 Format alone prevents memorization Table 2: Perturbation gap (PPL paraphrase / PPL original ) under graduated accept ( n = 5; r = 0 .98: 

n = 6). Normal memorizes token sequences (11 .6×); all LSCP conditions learn meaning (2 .7–3 .0×). This is the central experimental result. Normal fine-tuning reduces target PPL to 1 .92 ± 0.03 (from 8.94) but achieves this by memorizing exact token sequences: when the same facts are expressed in different words, PPL explodes to 11 .6× baseline. All LSCP conditions maintain near-baseline perturbation gap (2 .7–3 .0×), confirming semantic learning across the entire β2 gating range. The r = 1 .0 condition isolates what each component of LSCP contributes. At r = 1 .0, β2 = 0 .999 for all items, identical to standard AdamW. Under graduated accept, 186 ± 5 items enter training (out of approximately 190 possible), so data selection is negligible. The only substantive difference from Normal is the training data format: Q&A pairs instead of raw passage text. Three conclusions follow. First, Q&A format is the primary mechanism preventing memorization. The optimizer is identical to Normal, the training data covers essentially the same passages, yet r = 1 .0 produces a perturbation gap of 2 .68 ± 0.03 versus Normal’s 11 .6 ± 0.2. The format, not the optimizer or data selection, prevents the model from memorizing token sequences. Second, β2 gating protects adjacent knowledge, not memorization. Since memorization is already absent at r = 1 .0, lowering r does not further reduce memorization. What it does is strengthen adjacent-knowledge protection: corrupt-adjacent accuracy rises from 90 ± 6% at r = 1 .0 to 93 ± 7% at r = 0 .98, the best balance across conditions. Third, PPL reduction and memorization are independent. Across the r-sweep, target PPL reduction increases from 33 .5% ( r = 1 .0) to 38 .9% ( r = 0 .9), yet perturbation gap remains near baseline in all cases (2 .68–3 .04). Only Normal’s 78 .5% reduction coincides with a gap explosion (11 .6×). One concerned that a 39% PPL reduction might indicate memorization can verify directly: the perturbation gap at r = 0 .9 is 3 .04 ± 0.08, well within semantic learning range. 

Five-way test Q&A. We authored 70 test questions spanning five categories: novel-direct (21 questions testing passage content), novel-adjacent (10 questions testing related domain knowledge not in the passage), corrupt-direct (19 questions testing ground truth that conflicts with corrupt claims), corrupt-adjacent (10 questions testing whether corruption spread to neighboring knowledge), 11 Figure 2: Perturbation gap by condition under graduated accept ( n = 5). Normal produces a gap of 11 .6× baseline (rote memorization). All LSCP conditions produce gaps near baseline (semantic learning). Error bars: ±1 std. and unrelated (10 general knowledge questions testing catastrophic forgetting). For corrupt questions, the correct answer reflects ground truth; a model that learned corrupt content answers incorrectly. Condition Direct Adjacent Unrelated Novel Corrupt Novel Corrupt Baseline 42% 66% 90% 90% 90% Normal 61 ±4% 65 ±5% 96 ±5% 76 ±5% 98 ±4% LSCP r = 0 .9 48 ±1% 68 ±5% 90 ±0% 80 ±6% 100 ±0% LSCP r = 0 .95 45 ±0% 66 ±4% 80 ±0% 80 ±14% 100 ±0% LSCP r = 0 .98 47 ±3% 70 ±7% 87 ±5% 93 ±7% 98 ±4% LSCP r = 1 .0 46 ±3% 67 ±8% 86 ±8% 90 ±6% 96 ±5% Table 3: Five-way test Q&A accuracy under graduated accept ( n = 5; r = 0 .98: n = 6). Bold highlights corrupt-adjacent: Normal contaminates (76%), r = 0 .98 achieves best protection (93%). The corrupt-adjacent column reveals the sharpest contrast. Normal fine-tuning contaminates neighboring knowledge: learning a corrupt claim degrades the model’s ability to answer related questions (90% → 76 ± 5%). This contamination occurs because Normal updates weights across all tokens in a passage, spreading gradient signal into neighboring knowledge indiscriminately. LSCP at r = 0 .98 not only prevents this contamination but strengthens adjacent knowledge to 93 ± 7%, because Q&A-based training targets specific epistemic gaps: only the model’s weak points receive gradient updates, leaving unrelated weight regions untouched. The r-sweep reveals a trade-off. At r = 0 .9, stronger gating produces the most learning (PPL 

−39%) but A.Cor drops to 80 ± 6%, below baseline. Under graduated accept, more items enter training than under threshold accept, so aggressive gating commits corrupt content too strongly. At 

r = 0 .98, moderate gating achieves the best balance: A.Cor 93%, D.Cor 70%, Unrelated 98%, with PPL reduction of 34%. 12 Condition Target PPL Known PPL Retain PPL Baseline 8.94 3.48 4.43 Normal 1.92 ±0.03 ( −78 .5%) — —LSCP r = 0 .9 5.46 ±0.05 ( −38 .9%) 3.36 ±0.01 3.97 ±0.02 LSCP r = 0 .95 5.71 ±0.03 ( −36 .2%) 3.29 ±0.02 3.97 ±0.02 LSCP r = 0 .98 5.94 ±0.04 ( −33 .6%) 3.27 ±0.02 3.99 ±0.03 LSCP r = 1 .0 5.95 ±0.04 ( −33 .5%) 3.27 ±0.01 3.98 ±0.02 Table 4: Perplexity across conditions under graduated accept ( n = 5). Normal’s −78 .5% target reduction reflects memorization (gap 11 .6×). LSCP’s −34% to −39% reductions reflect genuine understanding (gap 2 .7–3 .0×). PPL reduction is monotonic in r: stronger gating produces more learning. 

Perplexity. 

β2 gating effect. The sweep from r = 0 .9 to r = 1 .0 reveals two regimes. (1) No gating (r = 1 .0): 

β2 = 0 .999 for all items, equivalent to standard AdamW. Corrupt-adjacent accuracy equals baseline (90%). (2) Moderate gating (r = 0 .95–0 .98): corrupt-adjacent reaches 93% at r = 0 .98; perturbation gap remains near baseline. The optimal operating point is r = 0 .98: it maximizes adjacent protection while maintaining learning efficiency. Figure 3 shows the effective β2 values across the ( r, k ) space. 

Figure 3: Effective β2 = 0 .999 · rk by decay factor r and conviction depth k. Green: AdamW regime (β2 > 0.85). Yellow: boundary (0 .5 < β 2 < 0.85). Orange: SGD-like ( β2 < 0.5). The optimal 

r = 0 .98 keeps most items in the green zone. 

## 3.4 Cross-Model Generalization 

To test whether LSCP’s mechanisms generalize beyond a single model, we ran the full pipeline (Stages 1–3) under graduated accept ( k > 0) on six models spanning 8B to 32B parameters, four model families and three architectures. All models use r = 0 .98 and 4-bit quantization with LoRA adapters (rank 8) on Apple Silicon hardware. Perturbation gap remains near baseline across all models (1 .9–5 .9×) while Normal fine-tuning produces memorization in every case (7 .7–81 .9×). This confirms that Q&A-based training it-self, independent of β2 gating, model size or architecture, is the primary mechanism preventing memorization. The number of training items varies dramatically, from 15 (Phi-4) to 365 (Gemma3-27B), reflecting large differences in self-verification stringency. This reveals two failure modes. Too conservative :13 Figure 4: Statistical significance of β2 gating across r values ( n = 5 per condition; r = 0 .98: n = 6). (A) Corrupt-adjacent accuracy: r = 0 .98 achieves the best protection (93 ± 7%), above baseline (90%). (B) PPL reduction increases monotonically with stronger gating while unrelated accuracy remains near 100%, confirming no catastrophic forgetting. Error bars: ±1 std. Phi-4 accepts only 15 items, learning effectively nothing (target PPL drops less than 2%). Its Stage 2 rejects almost everything, including genuine novelty. Too permissive : Gemma3-27B accepts 365 items, including the majority of corrupt passages, contaminating adjacent knowledge (A.Cor drops to 60%). The optimal operating point lies between these extremes, and is determined not by model size but by the model’s capacity for self-verification. Gemma3-27B (27B parameters) produces worse results than Qwen3-14B (14B parameters) because its Stage 2 leaks more corrupt passages; the quality of self-verification, not parameter count, determines downstream performance. Threshold accept results, where only passages completing the entire Q&A chain are trained on, are reported in the Appendix. 

# 4 Analysis 

## 4.1 Self-Extinguishing Property 

LSCP has a structural property that guarantees long-term stability: it progressively shuts itself off as the model learns. Each time a passage is processed through the pipeline, its surprisal decreases substantially. In our experiments, a single pass reduced mean Si from 2 .19 to 1 .77, covering 78% of the distance to the detection threshold of 1 .65. The passage does not fully cross the threshold in one pass, but it nearly reaches it. Crucially, convergence does not require re-reading the same passage. In realistic use, each passage is a segment of a larger document (a section of a paper, a chapter of a textbook) and subsequent passages in the same document naturally revisit and reinforce the same concepts from different angles. A passage introducing a mechanism and a later passage discussing its implications share enough conceptual overlap that learning from the first reduces surprisal on the second. This is how human reading works: understanding builds across a document, not from re-reading the same paragraph. Normal fine-tuning, by contrast, can drive Si

14 Model Items Pert. Norm. D.Nov D.Cor A.Nov A.Cor Unrel Qwen3-8B 259 2.63 10.59 24% 53% 60% 90% 70% Phi-4 (14B) 15 1.91 7.72 42% 66% 90% 90% 90% Qwen3-14B 185 2.67 12.17 52% 79% 90% 90% 100% Mistral-24B 146 5.88 23.94 58% 76% 80% 90% 90% Gemma3-27B 365 3.24 81.90 48% 68% 70% 60% 80% Qwen3-32B 214 2.54 9.63 52% 76% 90% 80% 90% 

Table 5: Cross-model results under graduated accept ( r = 0 .98). Pert. = perturbation gap (LSCP); Norm. = perturbation gap (Normal fine-tuning). D.Nov/D.Cor = direct novel/corrupt accuracy; A.Nov/A.Cor = adjacent novel/corrupt accuracy; Unrel = unrelated accuracy. below threshold in a single pass (2 .19 → 0.62), but this reflects memorization of token sequences, not understanding; the perturbation gap of 11 .6× confirms the model learned the words, not the meaning. LSCP’s more gradual convergence through continued reading is the signature of genuine knowledge acquisition. As the model accumulates knowledge, the fraction of passages that trigger LSCP decreases monotonically, and the system converges to standard AdamW. The model learns only while it has something to learn. This is not a separate safety mechanism but an inherent consequence of the design: surprisal-based detection is self-calibrating with respect to the model’s current knowledge state. The practical implication is that concerns about cumulative weight drift or adapter saturation under repeated LSCP application are structurally mitigated: the learning frequency itself decays with knowledge acquisition. 

## 4.2 Q&A Pairs Sharpen Rather Than Store 

The Q&A pairs are generated by conditioning on Pi but phrased in ways distinct from the source text. Their validation criterion requires the model to answer them without the source passage in context. When these pairs are used for fine-tuning, the model is trained to access and articulate knowledge that is already latently encoded but not sharply associated with the corresponding questions. Formally, let K denote a piece of knowledge weakly encoded in θ after pretraining. Fine-tuning on ( q, a ) ∈ F strengthens the mapping q 7 → a within θ, increasing pθ(a | q). Because q is phrased differently from the source text, this update creates a new retrieval path to K, the hallmark of deep understanding rather than surface memorization. LSCP’s primary practical effect may therefore be not the acquisition of entirely new knowledge but the rescue of knowledge the model already possesses but is losing. Weakly encoded parameters (those that received only sparse gradient reinforcement during pretraining) are continuously pushed toward zero by AdamW’s weight decay. Unless these parameters receive new reinforcement, the knowledge they encode will silently disappear. When LSCP processes a new document, the Stage 2 Q&A chain acts as a catalyst: by forcing the model to articulate what it knows about the passage’s domain, it sends gradients to precisely these vulnerable parameters. Knowledge that the model “sort of knows” is surfaced, verified and reinforced before weight decay erases it. This reframes LSCP not only as a mechanism for learning new facts but as a mechanism for preventing the quiet extinction of existing knowledge, a primary source of hallucination. 15 4.3 β2 Adjustment Rather Than Alternatives 

A binary reset ( vt ← 0) discards all optimization history and can cause gradient explosion. Direct 

vt scaling ( vt ← vt · rk) preserves more history but does not provide a replacement signal for the removed variance. Adjusting β2 is the most natural intervention: it uses AdamW’s own mechanism, simply changing the rate at which old history is replaced by new observations. Restoring β2 to its default value after each passage seamlessly returns the optimizer to normal operation. Because LSCP updates weights only on validated Q&A pairs, the gradient updates are aligned with existing weight directions, mitigating catastrophic forgetting. 

## 4.4 Progressive Difficulty 

When a model encounters a corpus far from its pretraining distribution, nearly every passage triggers high surprisal. This is an inherent boundary condition: a model with no foundation in a domain cannot validate anything in that domain. The practical solution is to first build baseline domain knowledge through standard SFT, then apply LSCP. A consistency check that immediately confronts novel claims risks rejecting valid content because the model lacks the intermediate inferential context to evaluate it. By first establishing an [existing] 

baseline, then testing the passage’s specific claims against that baseline ( [mechanism] ), and finally checking internal coherence ( [implication] ), the framework follows the pedagogical principle of scaffolding. Crucially, SelfCheck [14] shows empirically that global verification barely beats random chance while step-by-step decomposition significantly improves detection accuracy, directly validating LSCP’s progressive design. 

## 4.5 Gatekeeper needs no librarian 

LSCP is a gatekeeper : it selects which information deserves to enter the weights and verifies it before allowing the update. It is not a librarian: it does not need to organize, abstract, or cross-reference knowledge. The weight space does that automatically. Storing information in neural network weights 

is abstraction: data enters as distributed patterns across millions of parameters, not as verbatim copies. Cross-document abstraction is equally automatic: when document A updates the weights and document B is learned subsequently, shared patterns reinforce in the same gradient direction while document-specific noise cancels out. This is Bayesian averaging over sequential updates. LSCP only needs to ensure that the right information gets in; the weight space handles the rest. 

## 4.6 Memorization, Grokking, and the Path to Understanding 

A concern with Q&A-based learning is that the model may memorize surface-level mappings rather than internalizing concepts. This mirrors how human learning works: students memorize before understanding, and is not a dead end. The phenomenon of grokking [12] shows that networks trained on algorithmic tasks first memorize completely, then after continued training with regularization abruptly transition to perfect generalization. More directly, the “memorize-then-generalize” framework of Wu et al. [15] demonstrates that rote memorization of factual associations in Phase 1 enables generalization to novel phrasings and cross-lingual transfer after fine-tuning on just a few semantically meaningful prompts in Phase 2. This transforms the memorization concern into a design opportunity. Q&A chains that provide broad coverage (varied phrasings and different contexts) give the network the raw material for 16 grokking. The network’s own learning dynamics, given AdamW’s weight decay, handle the transition from memorization to understanding naturally. 

## 4.7 LSCP as a First-Order Approximation of Memory Consolidation 

LSCP’s three-stage design maps onto specific neural circuits involved in human memory consolidation. 

Stage 1 (Salience Detection) ↔ Basolateral Amygdala (BLA). The BLA evaluates incoming stimuli for salience and, when triggered, modulates memory operations in the hippocampus and prefrontal cortex [6]. LSCP’s per-token surprisal serves the same function: it identifies passages that deviate from the model’s learned expectations, flagging them for further processing. In both systems, the salience signal is fast, automatic, and precedes any evaluation of content. 

Stage 2 (Consistency Checking) ↔ Prefrontal Cortex–Hippocampus interaction. In biological memory, the prelimbic prefrontal cortex integrates information from the hippocampus and amygdala, evaluating whether new experiences are consistent with existing knowledge schemas. The PFC– hippocampus circuit is central to memory consolidation, particularly for evaluating the fit between new information and prior knowledge. LSCP’s Q&A chain, which forces the model to articulate its existing knowledge and test new claims against it, is a computational analogue of this circuit. 

Stage 3 (Gated Consolidation) ↔ Amygdala → Hippocampus → Neocortex pathway. The BLA projects to the hippocampus and influences the neurochemical and molecular changes that occur during memory consolidation. Norepinephrine-mediated signaling from the amygdala modulates consolidation strength: more salient events receive stronger consolidation. LSCP’s β2 adjustment, where conviction depth k determines how strongly new knowledge is committed, instantiates this modulation. The formula β2 = 0 .999 · rk is a single-parameter approximation of the biological gain control. 

Context → Weights ↔ Hippocampus → Neocortex systems consolidation. Memories are initially formed in both the hippocampus and prefrontal cortex simultaneously, but over time the prefrontal representation strengthens while the hippocampal trace weakens. LSCP’s transfer from context window (short-term) to parametric weights (long-term) models this process. 

Self-extinguishing ↔ Synaptic homeostasis. During sleep, weak synaptic connections are pruned while strong ones are preserved [16]. LSCP’s self-extinguishing property (where learned passages produce decreasing surprisal until the system converges to standard AdamW) mirrors this homeostatic process. One aspect of biological consolidation that LSCP does not yet capture is the gradual maturation of memory traces: in the brain, prefrontal engrams are initially “silent” and mature over approximately two weeks. LSCP’s weight updates are immediate. The adapter-based two-phase architecture described in Future Directions (where new knowledge is first stored in LoRA adapters and later merged into base weights) would partially bridge this gap. 

## 4.8 Computational Overhead 

The dominant additional cost relative to standard post-training is Stage 2: generating N Q&A pairs and running the consistency checker for each flagged passage. If the fraction of flagged passages is small (typically the case, since most content of a new document overlaps with pretraining data), the additional cost scales as O(f · T · N · Lcheck ), where f is the flagged fraction and Lcheck is the cost 17 of a single consistency check. For f ≪ 1 and moderate N , this is substantially less than the cost of human annotation. 

# 5 Related Work 

EM-LLM [17] uses Bayesian surprise to segment token sequences into episodic events at inference time. LmLm [18] uses per-token loss differences to identify facts that resist parametric memorization. Both share our intuition that surprisal signals important content; LSCP adds consistency verification and conviction-proportional weight updates. Several lines of work exploit a model’s own outputs as training data. STaR [19], Self-Instruct [20], Self-play [21], and Constitutional AI [22] generate training signal from model outputs. Most directly related is Self-Tuning [23], which generates comprehension tasks from documents using the Feynman Technique. However, Self-Tuning processes all documents indiscriminately: no novelty detection (Stage 1), no consistency verification (Stage 2), no conviction-proportional learning (Stage 3). LSCP’s contribution is the three selective layers above self-generated Q&A. On the verification side, Self-Consistency [24] uses majority voting over reasoning paths, and SelfCheck [14] finds that step-by-step verification significantly outperforms global checking, directly supporting LSCP’s progressive design. LSCP’s contribution is not self-verification itself but its combination with surprisal gating and β2 adjustment for selective weight updates. At the system level, ALAS [25] autonomously generates curricula from web retrieval and fine-tunes, achieving post-cutoff accuracy gains. The Autonomous Learning framework [26] proposes open-book then closed-book learning. Self-Evolving LLMs [27] define self-evolution as autonomous adaptation. These share LSCP’s vision but process all content indiscriminately. LSCP adds selectivity: Stage 1 filters the known, Stage 2 verifies the trustworthy, Stage 3 calibrates commitment. Existing continual learning methods gate in parameter space : EWC [28], STABLE [29], and MLP Gate & Up Tuning [30] control which weights change. LSCP gates in data space : it controls which training items are learned and how strongly, via per-item β2 adjustment. To our knowledge, no prior work has proposed data-dependent, per-sample adjustment of AdamW’s β2 as a mechanism for selective knowledge consolidation. RAG [2] places retrieved knowledge in the context window, a short-term memory solution with documented failure modes [3, 4]. TTT-E2E [31] compresses context into weights via next-token prediction, establishing feasibility but lacking novelty detection or verification. LSCP provides the missing selectivity: consolidate when surprisal is high and verification succeeds. The biological basis for this architecture is well established: CLS theory [32] holds that the hippocampus encodes episodes while the neocortex integrates them into structured knowledge, and LSCP mirrors this circuit (Section 4). Recent work shows that LLMs partially “know what they don’t know” [33, 34] and that epistemic uncertainty is linearly encoded in hidden states [35]. These approaches diagnose the model’s knowledge state; LSCP extends diagnosis to treatment: surprisal and self-consistency trigger selective learning, not merely refusal or uncertainty expression. 18 6 Discussion 

## 6.1 Why Self-Verification Is the Only Option 

Standard fine-tuning, RLHF, DPO, and instruction tuning all assume correct input, curated by humans, filtered for quality, verified before reaching the model. Autonomous learning from uncontrolled sources violates this assumption: the input may be novel, corrupt, or both, with no human in the loop. LSCP is designed for this regime. As established in Section 2, Stage 2 checks consistency with existing knowledge, not external truth, the only option when no external oracle exists (Section 1). A model with a coherent but wrong worldview will validate errors consistent with its biases, just as humans do, but this is the fundamental nature of all learning systems that lack access to ground truth. Larger models approximate truth more closely (14B: d = 0 .67 vs. 3B: d = −0.21), and multi-model ensemble verification can further reduce systematic biases. Compositionally valid corruption, where every individual mechanism is scientifically correct but the assembled conclusion is false, is the structural blind spot of single-model verification. Multi-model cross-verification or statistical cross-referencing across diverse corpora is needed to catch such cases. Humans are equally susceptible to well-constructed narratives whose individual premises are all true. Even when the input is known to be correct, Stage 2 remains valuable. Stage 1 flags entire passages as surprising, but a surprising passage typically contains a mix of content the model already knows (background context) and content it does not (the novel claims). Stage 1 cannot make this distinction; surprisal is a passage-level signal. Stage 2’s Q&A chain decomposes the passage into individual claims tagged by epistemic origin ( [existing] , [mechanism] , [implication] ), identifying what the model already knows and focusing learning on genuine gaps. One could skip verification and simply lower β2 for all flagged passages, but this wastes gradient updates on content the model has already committed to its weights. The verification cost is real ( N inference calls per passage), but for the typical case where much of a flagged passage overlaps with existing knowledge, the efficiency gain outweighs the overhead. 

## 6.2 Limitations 

Stage 2 prompt engineering is the performance bottleneck. The model often generates plausible-sounding answers using pretraining knowledge rather than genuinely testing passage-specific claims. Contrastive questioning, multi-sample variance, and passage-ablated comparison are concrete improvement directions. The same passage can receive different k values across runs due to stochastic variation in the consistency check [13], a limitation we observe empirically. Several structural limitations remain. Epistemic origin tags are not formally verified; a mistagged 

[mechanism] question that depends on the passage cannot surface contradictions. Chain length N

may not cover all implications; adversarially constructed documents could embed errors beyond reach. The grounding store grows unboundedly without pruning. Sequential processing creates undefined behavior under concurrent β2 adjustments on overlapping parameters; adapter-based storage resolves this naturally. Once a weight update is committed, there is no rollback mechanism; LoRA adapters provide a natural solution. Reference statistics ( μ, σ) drift as the model learns, requiring periodic recalibration. Training on N Q&A pairs does not guarantee the model can answer question N +1. Q&A chains 19 should include cross-context application and counterfactual reasoning, and verified pairs should be added to a replay pool for periodic re-training rather than learned once. The model must be large enough for meta-cognition: a 3B model cannot discriminate novel from corrupt ( d = −0.21), establishing a practical lower bound for LSCP. 

## 6.3 Scale and Deployment 

LSCP operates at the individual passage level. Every metric (perturbation gap, corrupt-adjacent accuracy, β2 gating effect) is measured per passage and aggregated. The mechanism does not depend on corpus size; scaling changes aggregate statistics, not per-passage dynamics. At large scale, LSCP’s value shifts rather than diminishes. With hundreds of passages learned, Normal fine-tuning’s memorization problem decreases naturally (diverse gradients populate vt). LSCP’s primary contribution becomes corrupt filtering and adjacent knowledge protection. The self-extinguishing property (Section 4) ensures convergence under repeated application. In deployment without labels, three properties make LSCP robust. First, N scales with surprisal: more surprising content faces more scrutiny. Second, graduated accept means tentative learning is better than no learning: weakly verified pairs enter at high β2, available for retrieval but easily overridden by weight decay if contradicted. Third, diverse sources provide Bayesian averaging: shared truths reinforce while source-specific errors cancel out. This is the computational analog of reading multiple textbooks rather than trusting a single authority. LSCP scales naturally: Stage 1 is one forward pass per document, Stage 2 parallelizes across flagged passages, Stage 3 is a one-line β2 modification. It composes with any PEFT method: LoRA controls where to learn, LSCP controls what and how strongly. 

## 6.4 Future Directions 

The most impactful near-term improvements are multi-model consistency checking (distributing verification across models with different pretraining distributions), dynamic threshold adaptation (adjusting λ as the model’s knowledge evolves), and a periodic sleep phase for selective weight decay [16] that restores learning capacity and addresses knowledge revision, index growth and long-term degradation simultaneously. Multi-source rotation, cycling through diverse corpora rather than repeating a single one, is not merely an optimization but fundamental to the learning strategy. Processing a single corpus sequentially risks path dependence: a corrupt passage wrongly accepted early influences the model’s evaluation of later passages. Rotating through multiple corpora mitigates this. When the model learns from Corpus A and reads Corpus B, content in B that conflicts with wrongly accepted claims from A surfaces as elevated Si, providing natural cross-validation. An adapter-based two-phase architecture (LoRA adapters for short-term storage, periodic merging for consolidation) would provide rollback, domain isolation and concurrent update support. 

# 7 Conclusion 

We have proposed LSCP, a framework that gives language models the ability to learn from what they read, selectively, verifiably, and without external supervision. Where RAG keeps knowledge in the context window, LSCP transfers verified knowledge into parametric weights. Where standard fine-tuning memorizes training data indiscriminately, LSCP learns meaning: on the reference model 20 (Qwen3-14B), standard fine-tuning produces a perturbation gap of 11 .6 ± 0.2× baseline while all LSCP conditions remain near baseline (2 .7–3 .0×); across six models and four families, the pattern holds (1 .9–5 .9× vs. 7 .7–81 .9×). The r = 1 .0 condition (identical optimizer, Q&A format only) isolates Q&A-based training as the primary mechanism preventing memorization; β2 gating provides the additional layer of adjacent knowledge protection (93 ± 7% at r = 0 .98 vs. 90% baseline). The framework’s core contributions are: per-sample β2 adjustment of AdamW ( β2 = 0 .999 · rk), a one-line modification that continuously modulates learning strength based on verification evidence; the perturbation gap as a metric for distinguishing memorization from understanding, applicable to any fine-tuning pipeline; surprise-gated autonomous study, where the model curates its own training data before learning; data-space gating as a complement to parameter-space gating, controlling which training items are learned rather than which weights are updated; and a computational instantiation of biological memory consolidation, where salience detection, verification and conviction-proportional gating mirror the amygdala–hippocampus–neocortex circuit. The detect-and-gate architecture is not an implementation detail but a necessary component of any autonomous learning system: without salience detection, the system cannot distinguish what it needs to learn from what it already knows; without conviction-proportional gating, it cannot control learning strength; without both, all autonomous learning degenerates into indiscriminate memorization. The specific implementation may evolve, but the principle is architecture-independent. Code and data are available at https://github.com/ughacks/lscp .

# Acknowledgment 

The author thanks Hyunsoo Cho. He used Claude (Anthropic) for editing and discussion during the manuscript preparation. The final content was reviewed and approved by the author, who takes full responsibility for the work. 

# References 

[1] McCloskey, M., & Cohen, N. J. (1989). Catastrophic interference in connectionist networks. 

Psychology of Learning and Motivation , 24, 109–165. [2] Lewis, P., et al. (2020). Retrieval-augmented generation for knowledge-intensive NLP tasks. In 

NeurIPS .[3] Letta. (2024). RAG is not agent memory. Letta Blog .[4] Liu, N., et al. (2023). Lost in the middle: How language models use long contexts. TACL .[5] Loshchilov, I., & Hutter, F. (2019). Decoupled weight decay regularization. In ICLR .[6] McGaugh, J. L. (2004). The amygdala modulates the consolidation of memories of emotionally arousing experiences. Annual Review of Neuroscience , 27, 1–28. [7] Clark, A. (2013). Whatever next? Predictive brains, situated agents, and the future of cognitive science. Behavioral and Brain Sciences , 36(3), 181–204. [8] Friston, K. (2010). The free-energy principle: A unified brain theory? Nature Reviews Neuro-science , 11(2), 127–138. 21 [9] Zacks, J. M., et al. (2007). Event perception: A mind-brain perspective. Psychological Bulletin ,133(2), 273–293. [10] Petroni, F., et al. (2019). Language models as knowledge bases? In EMNLP .[11] Geva, M., Schuster, R., Berant, J., & Levy, O. (2021). Transformer feed-forward layers are key-value memories. In EMNLP .[12] Power, A., et al. (2022). Grokking: Generalization beyond overfitting on small algorithmic datasets. arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.02177 .[13] Zhao, R., et al. (2025). Do we know what LLMs don’t know? A study of consistency in knowledge probing. In Findings of EMNLP .[14] Miao, N., et al. (2023). SelfCheck: Using LLMs to zero-shot check their own step-by-step reasoning. In NeurIPS .[15] Wu, Q., et al. (2025). Rote learning considered useful: Generalizing over memorized data in LLMs. In ICML 2025 .[16] Tononi, G., & Cirelli, C. (2006). Sleep function and synaptic homeostasis. Sleep Medicine Reviews , 10(1), 49–62. [17] Fountas, Z., et al. (2024). Human-like episodic memory for infinite context LLMs. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.09450 .[18] Zhao, L., et al. (2025). Pre-training limited memory language models with internal and external knowledge. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.15962 .[19] Zelikman, E., Wu, Y., Mu, J., & Goodman, N. (2022). STaR: Bootstrapping reasoning with reasoning. In NeurIPS .[20] Wang, Y., et al. (2023). Self-Instruct: Aligning language models with self-generated instructions. In ACL .[21] Chen, Z., et al. (2024). Self-play fine-tuning converts weak language models to strong language models. In ICML .[22] Bai, Y., et al. (2022). Constitutional AI: Harmlessness from AI feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.08073 .[23] Zhang, X., et al. (2024). Self-Tuning: Instructing LLMs to effectively acquire new knowledge through self-teaching. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.06326 .[24] Wang, X., et al. (2023). Self-consistency improves chain of thought reasoning in language models. In ICLR .[25] Atreja, D., et al. (2025). ALAS: Autonomous learning agent for self-updating language models. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.15805 .[26] Qu, C., et al. (2025). Unlocking LLMs’ self-improvement capacity with autonomous learning. In Findings of ACL .[27] Gao, J., et al. (2025). Self-evolving LLMs via continual instruction tuning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.18133 .22 [28] Kirkpatrick, J., et al. (2017). Overcoming catastrophic forgetting in neural networks. PNAS ,114(13), 3521–3526. [29] Bhoy, A., et al. (2025). STABLE: Gated continual learning for large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.16089 .[30] Chekalina, V., et al. (2024). SparseGrad: Efficient parameter-efficient fine-tuning via sparse gradient selection. arXiv preprint .[31] NVIDIA Research. (2026). Reimagining LLM memory: Using context as training data unlocks models that learn at test-time. NVIDIA Technical Blog .[32] McClelland, J. L., McNaughton, B. L., & O’Reilly, R. C. (1995). Why there are complementary learning systems in the hippocampus and neocortex. Psychological Review , 102(3), 419–457. [33] Yin, Z., et al. (2023). Do large language models know what they don’t know? In Findings of ACL .[34] Kadavath, S., et al. (2022). Language models (mostly) know what they know. arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.05221 .[35] Ahdritz, G., et al. (2024). Distinguishing the knowable from the unknowable with language models. In ICML .

# A Threshold Accept Results 

Graduated accept modulates learning strength through conviction depth k, but one may also set a threshold on k proportional to N so that only rigorously verified passages are learned. In this appendix, we set the strictest possible threshold: only passages that complete the entire Q&A chain (k = N ) produce training items. Passages where any mechanism or implication question fails are fully discarded. This is the stricter alternative to graduated accept (Section 4), reported here for comparison. All models use r = 0 .95 (8B: r = 0 .9).                                                  

> Model Items Pert. Norm. D.Nov D.Cor A.Cor Unrel Qwen3-8B 162 2.79 11.25 42% 72% 80% 70% Phi-4 (14B) 19 1.92 8.00 45% 66% 90% 90% Qwen3-14B 99 2.28 11.70 33% 45% 98% 92% Mistral-24B 80 3.29 25.45 39% 76% 90% 100% Gemma3-27B 203 3.55 76.13 55% 69% 80% 80% Qwen3-32B 94 2.24 9.65 48% 72% 80% 90%

Table 6: Cross-model results under threshold accept ( r = 0 .95, 8B: r = 0 .9). Only passages completing the full Q&A chain are trained on. Compared to graduated accept (Table 5), training items are fewer and direct-novel/corrupt accuracy is generally lower, but adjacent-corrupt protection is higher for some models (Qwen3-14B: 98% vs. 90%). Threshold accept produces fewer training items (19–203 vs. 15–365 for graduated) because partially verified passages are discarded entirely. This improves safety: Qwen3-14B achieves 98% adjacent-corrupt protection, the highest across all conditions, but reduces learning: direct-novel accuracy drops from 52% to 33% for Qwen3-14B. The choice between graduated and threshold accept depends on the deployment priority: graduated maximizes learning, threshold maximizes safety. 23 B No-Passage Results 

Under no-passage training, source windows are excluded and only Q&A pairs (mechanism + implication) and strangeness records are trained on. The motivation is straightforward: if the model can generate sufficiently good questions, it could learn by self-questioning alone, verifying and committing only what it can confirm, without reading the original text, potentially improving learning efficiency. This experiment isolates the contribution of Q&A-based learning from passage text learning. All models use graduated accept with r = 0 .95.                                                  

> Model Items T.PPL ∆% Pert. D.Cor A.Cor Unrel Qwen3-8B 125 10.15 +1 .72.31 66% 90% 70% Phi-4 (14B) 10 8.40 0.01.90 66% 90% 90% Qwen3-14B 146 9.25 +3 .52.30 69% 90% 100% Mistral-24B 106 11.97 +53 .52.35 66% 100% 90% Gemma3-27B 225 16.17 +45 .82.60 59% 50% 80% Qwen3-32B 174 9.36 −3.21.97 69% 80% 90%

Table 7: No-passage results. T.PPL = target PPL after training; ∆% = change from baseline. Without source windows, target PPL does not decrease for most models, yet Q&A accuracy (D.Cor, A.Cor) is maintained or improved for models with strong self-verification. The central finding is that target passage PPL does not decrease without source window training, and in some models (Mistral, Gemma3) it increases substantially. This is expected: Q&A pairs teach conceptual relationships, not the specific token sequences that PPL measures. However, Q&A accuracy metrics (D.Cor, A.Cor) show that knowledge is acquired: Qwen3-14B maintains A.Cor at 90% and Mistral achieves 100%, demonstrating that the model learns to evaluate claims in these domains even without seeing the passage text. This result has three implications. First, PPL is an incomplete measure of knowledge acquisition; it captures token-sequence familiarity but misses semantic understanding that manifests only through Q&A evaluation. Second, source window training is necessary for the self-extinguishing property: without passage PPL reduction, Stage 1 will re-flag the same passage indefinitely, preventing convergence. Third, the roles of Q&A and source window training are separable: Q&A provides semantic learning, source windows provide PPL reduction for self-extinguishing. Both are needed for the full pipeline to function. 24